---
layout: post
title: "The problem with software agents is planning"
date: 2026-03-16
mathjax: true
---

The problem with the software agents of today is that they are unable to reliably execute a long sequence of (software) tasks to a degree of fidelity that can be called production ready. This is the planning problem that is also experienced in other fields where an autonomous entity needs to take _actions_, for example:

- Autonomous cars
- Humanoid robots

These fields are quite familiar with the hardness of the planning problem: namely that their actions can land them into a state that is unfamiliar, or uncerrepresented, or completely absent from their training data. For this reason, they can go 'off the rails'. That is, they can enter a state from which they do not know how to recover (and having another software agent supervise another software doesnt help because its trained on the same training data). Fundamentally this class of problems is different from the prior geenration of machine learning because they involve _autonomous actions_ on the part of the AI system, and when actions are involved, the system can change its own state, and therefore influence the set of options avaiable to it at future time steps. Simply put, this is a Decision Process defined over, (States, Actions, Rewards). 

In a certain sense, all 3 of these problems (autonomous vehicles, robots and software agents) operate in a closed loop and involve a _planner_. The closed loop is: Perceive --> predict --> plan --> execute --> new state --> repeat.

The planner is responsible for deciding what action to take next to achieve the ultimate goal. Often the planner plans not just 1 step ahead, but an entire trajectory (but does not necessarily take all the future actions in a chosen trajectory, because it can switch to another candidate trajectory). Planning is a complex problem because it requires (a) adherence to rules and ettiquete, (b) making progress toward the goal (c) perceiving ones surroundings and predicting what others might do at future time steps. 

Of these 3 areas, the autonomous vehicles is the most mature, having realized the above problem a long time ago. The AV literature is clear on the fact that for the purpose of planning, behavior cloning is insufficient precisely because of the above reason. Therefore the planner stage typically tries to combine candidate plans generated by a behavior cloning module, with auxilliary losses that are used for scoring candidate plans on the basis of safety, smoothness of trajectory and adherence to laws. Humanoid robots are starting to incorporate behavior cloning too, and no doubt they too will need to supplement it, to avoid the problem of getting stuck. Onthe other hand, I have not yet come across software agent planners being designed with this problem in mind. That is, software agents seem to be driven by underlying text-heavy LLMs which are trained on next-token prediction and finetuned using RLHF. My hunch is that this training objective may not transfer well enough to the problem of sequential decision making when actions are involved. 
