I've noticed what I think is a behavioral pattern: 

- People tend to cooperate with other people in their own socio-economic strata (rather than across strata),
- Further this cooperation is more prevalent in lower income strate than higher income strata. I think this is because cooperation is more necessary for survival in those strata, and less necessary in higher income strata. 
- Furthermore, I hypothesize that most people in a cooperative setting tend to get comfortable with the status quo, as opposed to trying to strive for the next higher strata at an individual level. I think this is partly due to the fact that moving to the next higher strata often involves breaking ties with their cooperative tribe from their current strata, which represents a loss in social capital. It is difficult to maintain social capital with members of other strata. 
- There is an interesting scene in the 2004 Bollywood movie _Swades_ in which Shahrukh Khan's character, who is visiting a village in India, during a long power cut, finds the villagers have gotten used to the state of affairs with regular power cuts - they no longer revolt against it, but instead they and together and sing songs in the darkness. He says to them, "I feel you have become used to of the darkness". 
- I feel the progress of a group of people in a strata, come less frequently from collective action by its members, and more often from the individual actions of members who wish to rise above it. Some such individuals who are successfull at transcending their stratum, come back to their tribe and lift up others, and are seen as leaders and role models to follow. 

On the point about forming cooperative bonds with members of one's own sociaeconomic stratum, versus other strata: Robert Putnam, author of Bowling Alone has a lot to say. In his bestselling book, Putnam chronicled the fall in social capital (he coind the term 'social capital') with hard data. He calls the former type of cooperation bonding capital and the latter type (across strata) 'bridging capital', and he things the US as a society used to do a better job of having bridging capital, but now it doesn't. The way to create bridging capital, according to him, is to join clubs - this is the topic of a new documentary made by Putnam. 
