Having hit 40 years of age recently and having worked in industry for 13+ years across 3 companies, I geneuinely feel grateful to have been exposed and encouraged to science early in my life. I don't think I fully appreciated the meaning and consequences of this until recently. There is something special about science -- and I speak of science in a broad sense, I got my bachelors, masters and doctoral degrees in Electrical Engineer, not in a natural science - it confers a certain systematic way of thinking about the world, of questioning assumptions and concllusions, of analysing information, of quantifying observations etc. that I think people in other domains do not _on average_ posses. The thing that makes this difficult to discern is that this is not necessarily the case for every individual who studied science and the converse is not necessarily true of individuals who studied something else -- there are ample examples of people who studied science or engineering but did not develop the scientific mindset, and vice-versa, for e.g. business people who have a scientific mindset. But _on average_ the distributions are different. And this takes some time to realize. At least it did for me. And I am thinkful to be on the scientific side -- this is not to ding people on the other side, but I do want to make a distinction - to pretend otherwise is like saying all pieces of art are equally beautiful - no, they are not. 

I want to spend some time describing _why_ it is a privilege, what it means to me, and some time describing the responsibility I feel towards improving the world. Let me begin be quoting a famous Indian space scientist that I admire, Dr. Satish Dhawan. Here he is referring to space technology being used for peaceful purposes such as national communication infrastructure and agricultural remote-sensing rather than formilitary applications: 

> The knife in the kitchen can be used for violence, or for cutting vegetables. The knife is not aware of the difference - the difference lies in the hand that operates the knife. 


